It's TED Talks Daily.
I'm Elise Hugh.
Prosthetics have advanced so much in recent years, but for amputees around the world,
they're still often way too expensive.
In his talk from TED 2022, bionic innovator Enzo Romero shares how he's found unconventional
solutions to get more advanced prosthetics to the people who need them.
He makes them more affordable and functional.
Have you ever wondered what makes great minds tick?
I'm Adam Grant, and on my new podcast, Rethinking, I'm trying to find the answers.
Every week, I interview some of my favorite thinkers to learn how we can bring out the
best in ourselves and others.
I talk to death-defying rock climbers, Oscar-winning filmmakers, creators like Lin-Manuel Miranda,
entrepreneurs like Mark Cuban, and thought leaders like Brene Brown.
Find Rethinking on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, Amazon Music, or wherever you listen.
Support for TED Talks Daily comes from Zelle.
When anyone sends you money or if you need to get paid back, always ask for Zelle.
With Zelle, the money goes straight into your bank account, and it works even if the sender
bank is somewhere different than you in the US.
It's really useful whether it's asking other parents from school to split the cost
of pizza or asking friends to chip in for a group gift for someone else.
The money goes straight into your bank account, typically in minutes between enrolled users,
and those of y'all who use Zelle probably know that already.
It's in more than 1,600 banking apps, so you can look for Zelle in your banking app
today.
One in seven people around the world has some kind of disability.
Being born without my right hand has defined who I am over the past 30 years.
I was fortunate to grow in the sacred valley of the Incas in Cusco, Peru, surrounded by
people who weren't surprised to see me driving my bike or probably playing basketball.
When I was seven, I remember being stunned after I watched Star Wars, The Empire Strikes
Back, when Luke's hand gets cut off, the same one I didn't have, but then being twice
a stun when the medical robots fitted him with a prosthesis that could move and feel.
From then on, no greater purpose lived in my mind, which was to have a prosthesis like
Luke Skywalker.
This dream led me to study mechatronics engineering and access the biomechanics and applied robotics
laboratory in Pontifical Catholic University of Peru, where, with a multidisciplinary team,
we developed a myoelectric prosthesis for long-term radial amputation, being me the
pilot user.
I was able to move each finger individually, and also we developed a way in which we get
to pass the sensation from the fingertips into my forearm using haptic feedback system.
Since this was a research project, we had enough funding to buy stuff from abroad.
So for example, the motors here were all brought by Switzerland.
This is one of the main reasons why it will cost at least $40,000 to make this prosthesis.
But 40k is way too much, considering that four out of five people with upper limb amputation
live in development countries.
And the $25,000 that costs a robotic prosthesis imported from abroad is way too much.
In Peru, that is equivalent to work full-time on a minimum wage for almost seven years,
just to buy the prosthesis, never mind pay for your food or your house.
It is often that people get injured while doing manual labor activities, like farming
or metal manufacturing.
Getting back to work and having access to money demands a functional hand.
It took me time to realize what a huge privilege I had to study a career that would help fulfill
my dreams.
But actually, what was preventing me from developing a solution that was both affordable
and functional?
The very first step in order to reduce the cost was to reduce the number of motors, because
they were all imported and therefore expensive.
So we get to arrange occupational focus groups with our amputee volunteers in order to identify
which gestures they will use the most and of those, how many we could perform using
just a single motor.
The answer was three.
Pinch, cylindrical, and lateral.
This also helps us to reduce the number of electromyographic sensors too.
From an arrangement of eight, we pass just to one.
In this way, between makes in your mechanical and my electric prosthesis, the prices will
be dramatically low.
But material prices matter too.
And that's why we choose to 3D print our prosthesis using mainly plastic from recycled
bottles.
In order to develop our prosthesis, the process will go like this.
First, we'll use our 3D scan and our own parameterization software in order to take the measures of
the amputated area and the other hand of the user.
Then we'll recreate the entire set of fingers, the palm, and the prosthesis socket in our
computational model to finally 3D print each of those parts.
So far, in lab bionics, we have two types of prosthesis.
Mach-E, which is a mechanical activation, and Pisco with electronic activation.
Pisco costs just 10% of an imported robotic prosthesis that will come from abroad.
This means that even more working class people can access to our technology.
For me, this has been a path where I was able to develop this in my company, lab bionics.
So for example, take Franco, which now is using his transradial Mach-E prosthesis in
order to get back to work with his providers on the jungle farm he has.
I am certain that we are able to be on the side with technology that is brought from
abroad to our region, being sold in a very expensive way.
We have the capacity to develop our own technology, having the necessities of our people in mind.
So then people with disabilities and limited resources could live a life again.
For me, when people, our users, get back to work on their places, that look of compassion
changed to astonishment.
The same astonishment which I had when I saw Luke Skywalker's prosthesis.
So this began as a path for myself, but it now belongs to my entire region.
Would you like to join us?
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Ted Talks Daily is hosted by me, Elise Huw, and produced by TED.
Theme music is from Allison Leighton Brown, and our mixer is Christopher Fazy-Bogan.
We record the talks at TED events we host, or from TEDx events, which are organized independently
by volunteers all over the world.
And we'd love to hear from you.
Leave us a review on Apple podcasts or email us at podcasts at ted.com.
PRX.